# individual-project-liamjkelly

[Here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1p8jdot4-vHfs6whv-HXBEgs5WsGMPGK9/view?usp=sharing) is a video of the project in action.

## Need to know items

* Unity version: 2019.2.0f1
* Click BeachCleanup.exe, an executable that is targeted for Windows use on an x86_64 architecture. The .exe file must be in the same folder as the folder BeachCleanup_Data, or else it will not run. The build files are located in the `BuildFiles` directory.

## Why did you make this? Intention/Motivation

Ever since I was a kid, there has been a huge movement to be less wasteful and limit your use of disposables. What do you do, though, to improve conditions that already exist? I personally have spent time volunteering and cleaning up litter on major roads in my town. Often, though, it feels very discouraging. It seems that for every piece of trash that you pick up, 2 more take its place. What impact can one person have on removing the over 8 million metric tons of plastic that enters our ocean every year (according to https://oceanconservancy.org/trash-free-seas/plastics-in-the-ocean/)? I decided to build this little VR environment to help do the math to determine the impact one person can have, and as an Earth and Environmental Sciences major and a Computer Science major, it displays only one of the limitless possibilities at the intersection of these two fields. I also wanted to highlight the work required to have an "impact". I'd like to espouse a doctrine of hope and puppies and rainbows but the truth is that improving the condition of our planet is a lot of work. I also wanted to highlight that one person can't do it alone. One person can definitely make a change, but they need the help of other people. A trend that went around the website reddit for awhile in the past few years is something called "trashtag". In trashtag, a group of people would clean up their local beach and post a picture of it on the website. It was incredible how one group of people could totally transform the appearance and health of their communities. My project is a virtual trashtag, or sorts. I modeled the environment after one of my favorite beaches in New Zealand, a little beach called Taylor's Mistake on the Banks Peninsula of the South Island. It was a relatively clean place, but I have a personal connection to it and wanted to envision what it might look like with trash all over it. I also wanted to see how well VR would capture the scale of the environment. From my memory, walking from the start of the beach down to the water at Taylor's mistake took probably 30 seconds. 

## Why is VR a good medium to achieve your goals?

I think that VR is good to show the scale of work required to make an "impact", in that you have to walk to each bottle and pick it up. Depending on the distribution of the bottles, that may take time. I also think that a visual representation of picking up all of the trash is much more beneficial than just doing the calculation and displaying a number. In my environment, the beach is covered in bottles spread every which way, but while picking them up, you can see the impact you are having on the beach and, in turn, the ocean. This creates a before and after, fulfilling my goal of creating a virtual trashtag. Overall, VR captures the appearance of the terrain, but in the next section I will go into a little detail about where it came up short. VR can replicate the physical toll of bending over relatively well, but some of the other physical aspects may not be replicated, of which I go into slightly more detail in the next section.

## Critiques or limitations of VR for your goals?

One limitation is that I cannot accurately represent the physical toll picking up these bottles would be. In VR, you can just move around with the joystick. In real life, however, you have the sun beating down on you, it can rain, the terrain can be uneven, and any number of things can go wrong. You have to expect the unexpected, and VR cannot replicate a sunny day instantly turning rainy and soaking you to the skin. In terms of the scale of the environment, in VR, the hills are higher in elevation, but I feel as if the terrain tool did not accurately convey the sheer scale of the actual hills that surround Taylor's mistake. This may be a scaling issue due to my work, however. 

I wrote the previous paragraph prior to testing, and I actually do believe that the physical toll is well represented. You have to bend over and pick up every single bottle (and there are many bottles). Also, regarding the scaling differences, I felt that it conveyed the general feel of the environment, but it is not the most true representation.